# Creating Container Classes
## "Generic" Operations
One common operation in programming is to **sort**. You will often have a collection of things and you will want to put them into a particular order. A simple sorting algorithm is **`SelectionSort`**, which finds the smallest value and swaps it into location `0`. It then finds the next smallest value and swaps it into location `1`. This repeats until the list is sorted.

**What if we want to sort different types (ints, doubles, Strings, or any Java type)?** We would need to write a different method for each one. If we want to sort a list of `int`s, we could write selection sort that works with `int`s. If we want to sort a list of `String`s, we could write another selection sort method that works with `String`s.

But, almost all of the code would be identical! The only real changes are that:
1. With `int`s, we'd use the less than operator (`<`) and with `String`s we'd use the `compareTo()` method
2. The method's parameters would take different kinds of lists (one with `int`s and one with `String`s).

But the core of the method would be identical. It would be great if we didn't need to duplicate so much code. It would be great if we could just write one generic selection sort method that could be used on any kind of data. In fact, we can use an interface to do this. Although, we can’t write a method that can sort “anything”, but we can write a method that can sort any `Comparable` objects.

Let's consider the [`Comparable<T>`](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/Comparable.html) interface. It contains just one method:
```Java
int compareTo(T r)
```
Notice the type `T`. It is a generic placeholder for any class type. This method will return a 
- negative `int`, if the current object is less than `r`
- zero `int`, if the two objects are equal
- positive `int`, if the current object is greater than `r`

Now, consider what we need to know about the data for our selection sort algorithm: "Is `A[i]` less than, equal to, or greater than `A[j]`?"

Thus, as long as we write our method to take objects implementing the `Comparable<T>` interface, we can sort them without knowing anything about them, other than what their `compareTo` method returns. The objects are almost like black boxes, only telling us how they compare to each other. This is possible due to polymorphism.

Note that this will not work for primitive types unless wrapper classes are used. As a consequence, we cannot sort `int`s in this way.
```Java
public static <T extends Comparable<? super T>> void selectionSort(T[] a, int n)
{
	for (int index = 0; index < n - 1; index++)
    {
		int indexOfNextSmallest = getIndexOfSmallest(a,index,n-1);
        swap(a, index, indexOfNextSmallest);
	} // end for
} // end selectionSort
private static <T extends Comparable<? super T>> int getIndexOfSmallest(T[] a, int first, int last)
{
    T min = a[first];
    int indexOfMin = first;
    for (int index = first + 1; index <= last; index++)
    {
        if (a[index].compareTo(min) < 0)
        {
			min = a[index];
			indexOfMin = index;
		} // end if
	} // end for
	return indexOfMin;
} // end getIndexOfSmallest
```
Again, notice that the argument is an array of `T` which implements the `Comparable` interface. Since the only method called is `compareTo()`, our code depends only on the fact that the data is `Comparable`. Note that bia polymorphism, `compareTo()` will be specific to each data type.

However, we do have some restrictions. We compare objects from inherently different types. This is an issue because we don’t want to compare “_apples to oranges_”. This is where the type parameter comes in:

Again, recall that the argument to `compareTo()` is **type `T`**.  `T` can be arbitrary but it must be compatible for two objects that are being compared. If the types are not compatible, a **compile-time error will be generated**. 

Note that prior to type parameters this check had to be done at run-time. Generally speaking it is preferable to detect errors at compile-time if possible. For example, for 2 objects, `C1` and `C2`, consider the call: `C1.compareTo(C2)`. If the object in `C1` is class `T` then the object in `C2` must be either class `T` or a superclass of `T`(Subclasses of `T` are also legal via isA). This allows super and subclass objects to be compatible, but it does not allow objects in different inheritance paths to be compared. I.e., if the types are incompatible, this will generate a compilation error.

See:
- [Example3.java](handout/Example3.java)
- [People.java](handout/People.java)
- [Worker.java](handout/Worker.java)
- [Student.java](handout/Student.java)
- [SortArray.java](handout/SortArray.java)

### More on Java Generics
Java allows for generic interfaces, classes and methods. We saw interface example `Comparable<T>`.

For example, if we want to mimic the functionality of a Java array:
- We want to create an object with an arbitrary number of locations. However, once created, the size is fixed.
- We want the underlying type to be any Java type. However, it should be homogeneous – cannot mix types (except if type is a superclass).
- We want to be able to assign a value to a location
- We want to be able to retrieve a value from a location
- We want to be able to tell the size of the array
```Java
public class MyArray<T>{
	// The underlying array will be an array of T
	private T [] theArray;
}
```
First notice the class header and data declaration. Since `T` is not bounded, any Java reference type can be used here.

The idea is that you can substitute any Java reference type for `T`. This is useful since we want the data to be arbitrary.
	For example, we can run: `MyArray<String> A = new MyArray<String>();`
  
See [MyArray.java](handout/MyArray.java) and [Example4.java](handout/Example4.java)
- Specifically, note how the array is created: We make an array of Object and cast it to T. This seems perhaps counter-intuitive but is necessary due to type rules in Java.

## Abstract Data Types (ADTs)
We are familiar with data types in Java, such as primitive data types (e.g. `int`, `double`, `boolean`) or reference types (e.g. `String`, `StringBuilder`, `JButton`, `File`). We can think of these as a combination (or encapsulation) of two things:
1. The **data itself** and its representation in memory. For classes, these are the _instance variables_.
2. The **operations** by which the data can be manipulated. For classes, these are the _methods_.

For example, consider the **`BigInteger`** type in Java. We can think of it simply as whole numbers, represented in some way in the computer, but this would be incomplete.

What makes `Integer` useful is the operations that we can do on them(`+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `%`, etc.). It is understanding the nature of the **data together with the operations** that can be done on it that make ints useful to us. Note that for `BigInteger`, the operations (ex: `+`, `*`) will not work, so we must implement the operations as methods.

So where does the abstract part come in? Note that in order to use `BigInteger`s in our programs, we _**only**_ need to know what they are and what their operations do. We do **_not_ need to know their implementation details**.

For example. we do not need to know how the `BigInteger` is **represented in memory**, or **how** the actual division **operation is done** on the computer.

More generally speaking, an ADT is a data type (data + operations) whose **functionality is separated from its implementation**. The same functionality can result from different implementations. **_Users_ of the ADT need only to know the functionality**. Naturally, however, to actually be used, ADTs must be implemented by someone at some point. **The _implementer_ must be concerned with the implementation details**. In this course, you will look at ADTs both from the **user's** and **implementer's** point of view.

We have already discussed the idea of data abstraction from classes. The difference is that **abstract data types are language-independent** representations of data types. They can be used to specify a new data type that can then be implemented in various ways using different programming languages. **Classes are language-specific structures** that allow the implementation of ADTs. Classes only exist in object-oriented or object-based languages.

There is not a one-to-one mapping from ADTs to classes(i.e., A given ADT can be implemented in different ways using different classes.) We will see soon that ADTs such as `Stack`, `Queue`, `SortedList` can be implemented in different ways. In fact, a given class can be used to represent more than one ADT. The Java class `ArrayList` can be used to represent a `Stack`, `Queue`, `Deque` and other ADTs.

Consider interfaces again, where you specify a set of methods, or, more generally a set of behaviors or abilities. You do not specify how those methods are actually implemented. You don't even specify the data upon which the methods depend. Thus, interfaces fit reasonably well with ADTs. One difference though is that ADTs _**do**_ specify the data, but we can infer much about the data based on the methods.

The text will typically use **interfaces as ADTs** and **classes as ADT implementations**. Using the interface, we will have to rely on descriptions for the data rather than actual data. The data itself is left unspecified and will be detailed in the class(es) that implement the interfaces. This is ok since the data is typically specific to an implementation anyway. One good example of this is the ADT `Stack`:
- `Push` an object onto the top of the Stack
- `Pop` an object off the top of the Stack
At this level (where we just describe the actions of the ADT), we don't care how the data is actually represented, as long as the methods work as specified.

### ADTs for Collections of Data
Many ADTs (especially in this course) are used to represent **collections** of data. A collection is when multiple objects are organized and accessed in a particular way. The organization and access is specified by the ADT (through interfaces in Java). The specific implementation of the data and operations can be done in various ways (through classes in Java).

With these ADTs:
1. First we will look only at the functionality of these ADTs (i.e. the user’s point of view)
	- What are they and what can we do with them?
2. We will discuss simple implementations
	- How do we implement them?

#### Queue ADT
The basic idea is that data is **added to the** (logical) **end**, and **removed from the** (logical) **front**.

See [02. Queue ADT](02.%20Queue%20ADT.md)

#### Bag ADT
The basic idea is that we want a collection that doesn't care about:
1. How many items to put in
2. The order of the items
3. Duplicate items

See [03. Bag ADT](03.%20Bag%20ADT.md)

#### List ADT
The basic idea is a collection of objects in a **specific order** and having the same data type.
- We also want to keep track of the number of objects in the collection
- Operations:
	- `add(newEntry)`
	- `add(newPosition, newEntry)`
	- `remove(givenPosition)`
	- `clear()`
	- `replace(givenPosition, newEntry)`
	- `getEntry(givenPosition)`
	- `toArray()`
	- `contains(anEntry)`
	- `getLength()`
	- `isEmpty()`

See See [04. List ADT](04.%20List%20ADT.md)