# Queues and Double Ended Queue(Deque)
## Introduction to Queues
The basic idea is that data is **added to the** (logical) **end** and **removed from the** (logical) **front**. Logically, the items other than the front item cannot be accessed. Some examples of real-life queues are:
* Bowling ball return lane: Balls are put in at the end and removed from the front, and you can only see / remove the front
* Check-out lanes at the supermarket: People enter at the end of the line and the person at the front of the line are served. (in fact, in British English, these lines are called queues)

The fundamental operations of a queue are:
  1.  `enqueue` (or `offer()`)  - add an item to the end of the queue
  2.  `dequeue` (or `poll()`) - remove an item from the front of the queue
  3.  `getFront` (or `peek()`) - look at the front item without disturbing it

Note. Java Queue also has `add()`, `remove()` and `element()`. These differ in behavior only when the Queue is empty. See Java API.
```Java
public interface QueueInterface<T>  // Textbook author's QueueInterface
{
	public void enqueue(T newEntry);  // add to logical back of queue
	public T dequeue();  // remove and return logical front item
	public T getFront();  // return front item without removing it
	public boolean isEmpty();  // is queue empty?
	public void clear();  // reset queue to empty state
} // end QueueInterface
```

A Queue is a very simple structure that organizes data by **F**irst **I**n **F**irst **O**ut, or **FIFO** (or **LILO** - **L**ast **I**n **L**ast **O**ut). A Queue is a simple but powerful data structure. They're used extensively for simulations. Many real life situations are organized in FIFO, and Queues can be used to simulate these. (Simulations are useful because they allow problems to be developed and analyzed on the computer, saving time and money.)

For example, a bank wants to determine how best to set up its lines to the tellers:
1.  Option 1: Have a separate line for each teller
2. Option 2: Have a single line, with the customer at the front going to the next available teller

How can we determine which will have better results? We could try each one for a while and measure throughput, customer satisfaction, etc. Obviously this will take time and may create some upset customers. An alternative would be to simulate each one using reasonable data and compare the results. This is just a simple example, but other (often more complex) problems can also be solved through **simulation**.


## Deque
A **Double-Ended Queue** (or **Deque**) allows the queue operations to be done on either "side" of the structure.
- We can add or remove from the "front" of the deque
- We can add or remove from the "back" of the deque
- We still do not have direct access to the "middle" of the deque
```Java
public interface DequeInterface<T>  // Text author's DequeInterface<T>
{
	public void addToFront(T newEntry);  // add at front
	public void addToBack(T newEntry);   // add at back
	
	public T removeFront();   // remove from front
	public T removeBack();    // remove from back
	
	public T getFront();   // get front item
	public T getBack();    // get back item
	
	public boolean isEmpty();  // is deque empty?
	
	public void clear();   // reset dequee
} // end DequeInterface
```
Note that a Deque has a lot more functionality than a Queue:
- An example use would be a simulation where items are added to the back and removed from the front (like a regular queue)
- But in some cases may have to be returned to the front of the queue
	  For example, at a post office you buy a priority mail box and must put on address before it is mailed, and the clerk lets you go back to the front of the line.

See [QueueDequeTest.java](handout/QueueDequeTest.java)


## Implementation: The Basics
So how do we implement a Queue and a Deque? We know that both require access / mutation on both ends of a list.
- Queue: Add on one side, remove on the other
- Deque: Add or remove on both sides

So we can:
- Maintain **front** of the queue or deque at **`index 0`** of the array
- Maintain **back** of the queue or deque with a **`back index`** that increases as items are added

Thus, we can add( or remove) from back is  very simple, and can be done in just a few operations. However, removing (or adding) from the front requires shifting of all of the other items (to either make room for a new item or to fill in for a removed item). For a queue, we could either: 
1. Add at back and remove from front (`index 0`)
2. Add at front (`index 0`) and remove from back
Note that either approach requires shifting of the data when adding or removing at the front. Since the front index is always location 0, we must move the data to the index

## Queue Implementation: The Specifics
To ensure that the `Queue` methods(`enqueue`, `dequeue`) are efficient(preferably $O(1)$), we need a structure that has access to both the front and the rear.

In *Recitation 1*, we implemented two primitive, array-based inefficient queues (`PrimQ1` and `PrimQ2`), which both had an $O(N)$ operation. In *Assignment 1*, we implemented an efficient array-based queue with $O(1)$ for both `enqueue` and `dequeue`. Note that this used a circular approach to accessing the data within the array. So what about a linked implemention?

### Linked-List Implementation
This implementation is fairly straightforward as long as we have a **doubly linked list** and **access to the front and rear** of the list. `Enqueue` simply adds a new object to the end of the list. `Dequeue` simply removes an object from the front of the list. Other operations are also simple. We can build our Queue from a `LinkedList` object, making the implementation even simpler. This is basically what Java does with the [Queue interface](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/util/Queue.html) and the [LinkedList class](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/util/LinkedList.html).
Note that Java's `Queue` is an **interface**. The `LinkedList` class *implements Queue* (among other interfaces). Even though `LinkedList` can do a lot more than just the Queue operations, if we use a Queue reference to the object, we restrict it to the Queue operations. Compare this to the [Stack](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/util/Stack.html), which was implemented as a class. However, the textbook author also uses an interface, but implements the Queue from scratch. 

Can we use another linked list implementation instead? Recall that when we looked at linked lists, we considered a circular linked list. The extra link gives us all the functionality we need for a Queue.
- enqueue? add after lastNode
	`newNode = new Node(newEntry, lastNode.next);`
	`lastNode.next = newNode;`
	`lastNode = newNode;`
- dequeue? remove successor of lastNode
	`frontNode = lastNode.next;`
	`lastNode.next = frontNode.next;`
	`return frontNode.data;`

The text takes this notion one step further. The logic of enqueue and dequeue is the same. However, when we dequeue, rather than removing the node (and allowing it to be garbage collected), we instead just "deallocate it" ourselves. This way we save some overhead of creating new nodes all the time. So, we keep two references: `queueNode` and `freeNode`. `queueNode` is the front of the queue and will be the next node dequeued. `freeNode` is the rear of the queue and points to the next node to be enqueued (if there aren't any nodes left, then we create a new node).





## Deque Implementation: The Specifics
Note to implement this efficiently ($O(1)$), we need a circular array implementation which is a fairly simple update to our queue.
- Adding at the front would move front index to the left
- Removing at the back would more back index to the left
- Both indices can wrap around either end of the deque

What about a linked implementation? Note again that we need to add or remove at either end of the dequeue. Some implementations that work for a queue will not work (efficiently) for the deque. What would work is a circular, doubly linked list. This will allow us to move in either direction and to easily update either "end" of the deque. A standard Java `LinkedList<T>` would work nicely, and it implements `Deque<T>`.

## Interlude: Array vs. Linked List Implementations
So far we have discussed both array- and linked list-based data structures:
- For Bag we have ArrayBag and LinkedBag
- For List interface we have ArrayList and LinkedList
- For Stack we have ArrayStack and LinkedStack
- For Queue we have linked list version in text and also the circular array-based version
	- Also standard Java versions

So is it better to use an array or a linked list? Consider Stack and Queue ADTs. As long as the resizing is done in an intelligent way, the array versions of these tend to be a bit faster than the linked list versions. For stacks, `push()`, `pop()` are $O(1)$ amortized time for both implementations, but they are a constant factor faster in normal use with the array version. For queues, `enqueue()`, `dequeue()` are $O(1)$ amortized time for both implementations, but they are a constant factor faster in normal use with the array version. But notice that the ArrayList does not automatically "down" size when items are deleted, so the ArrayList-based Stack will not either. This could waste memory if it previously had many entries.

In general, you need to decide for a given application which implementation is more appropriate. However, in most programming situations, these data structures are already defined for you in a standard library, such as the Java Collections Framework (e.g. stack is array-based, queue is linked list-based).

It's still good to understand how they are implemented, but more often than not we just use the standard version, due to convenience.
