# Iterators

## Introduction

Recall that the `ListInterface` is just a set of methods that indicate the behaviors of classes that implement the interface. As we saw, classes could use arrays or linked lists (or possibly another data structure) to store the data. So, how could a user of any List implementation access the data in a sequential way? Using what we saw above, we could:

- call the `toArray()` method and step through it like you would with any other array
- use the `getEntry()` method to directly step through the List

Consider [Example9.java](handout/Example9.java). There are two printData methods to print out all of the values in a list.

1. One uses `toArray()` as we just mentioned
   - See `printData2()` in `Example9.java`
2. The other uses a loop and the `getEntry()` method
   - See `printData1()` in [Example9.java](handout/Example9.java)
     Note that `getEntry()` is called for each index in the list. For the AList this is fine, since we have direct access to the locations. However, for the LinkedList this is TERRIBLE. - getEntry(1) – 1 operation - getEntry(2) – 2 operations - getEntry(3) – 3 operations - … - This gets us a sum of $1+2+3+...=\frac{N(N+1)}{2}\implies{O(N^2)}$

The `getEntry()` is so poor for a linked list, because each `getEntry()` operation restarts at the beginning of the list. There is no memory from one call to the next. We "revisit" all previous nodes to get to the next node in the next `getEntry()` call. What if we could "_remember_" where we stopped the last time and resume from there the next time? We can do this with an **iterator**.

An **iterator** is an object that allows us to iterate through a list in a sequential way, regardless of how the list is implemented. The iterator **maintains the state of the iteration** and progresses **one location at a time**. The details of _how_ we progress are left up to the implementer; the _how_ is abstracted from the user's view. The user of the interface just knows that it goes through the List in order.

EOL 21

---
Why do we need these? What good are they? We will see that the implementation can be a bit convoluted, leading to questions like "are these things really worth while?" They are worth while for two main reasons:
1. They allow multiple iterations to co-exist on the same underlying List.
2. They can tailor the implementation of the iteration to the underlying data structure, without requiring the client to know it.

For the first reason (multiple co-existing iterations), consider the following situation. We have a set of data and we want to find the *mode* of that set (the most frequent value). How can we do this? Start at the first value and count how many times it occurs through the rest of the list. Then proceed to the next value and count how many times it occurs. Repeat for each value in the List, keeping track of the value with the highest count. 
<table border="1">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:4ex;text-align:center;">30</td>
			<td style="width:4ex;text-align:center;">60</td>
			<td style="width:4ex;text-align:center;">20</td>
			<td style="width:4ex;text-align:center;">30</td>
			<td style="width:4ex;text-align:center;">20</td>
			<td style="width:4ex;text-align:center;">80</td>
			<td style="width:4ex;text-align:center;">60</td>
			<td style="width:4ex;text-align:center;">20</td>
			<td style="width:4ex;text-align:center;">30</td>
			<td style="width:4ex;text-align:center;">60</td>
			<td style="width:4ex;text-align:center;">80</td>
			<td style="width:4ex;text-align:center;">20</td>
			<td style="width:4ex;text-align:center;">60</td>
			<td style="width:4ex;text-align:center;">70</td>
			<td style="width:4ex;text-align:center;">20</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>
- First we see `30` and count occurences (3)
- Next we see `60` and count occurences (4)
- Next we see `20` and count occurences (5)
- Lastly, we see `70` and count occurences (1)

Note that we have two separate "iterations" through the list being accessed in the same code. One is going through the list, identifying each item. The other is counting the occurrences of that item. Logically, they are separate, even though they are progressing through the same List. For a List, we can also do this with nested for loops and the `getEntry()` method. However, the implementation of `getEntry()` is very inefficient for a linked list (as discussed previously).

So why not use two iterators? The "*outer*" iterator considers the next item in the list, while the "*inner*" iterator counts the number of occurences of that item. Note that these iterators are independent(The "outer" iteration and the "inner" iteration have different states and are at different positions in the list). 

Example: `getModeIterator1()`([Example13.java](handout/Example13.java))
```Java
public static void getModeIterator1(List<Integer> L)
{
	Iterator<Integer> outer = L.iterator();
	Iterator<Integer> inner;
	Integer theMode = null, currOuter = null, currInner = null;
	int modeCount = 0, currCount = 0;
	while (outer.hasNext())
	{
		currOuter = outer.next();
		currCount = 0;
		inner = L.iterator();
		while (inner.hasNext())
		{
			currInner = inner.next();
			if (currInner.equals(currOuter))
				currCount++;
		}
		if (currCount > modeCount)
		{
			theMode = currOuter;
			modeCount = currCount; 
		}
	}
	System.out.println("The mode is " + theMode + " with " +
 			   modeCount + " occurrences ");
}
```






This brings us to the second main reason iterators are worth while: You can tailor the implementation to the data structure. Consider again `LinkedVSArrayList.java` where we were using `getEntry()` to get each item in a List. For the AList, this was fine since we have direct access to the locations. However, for LList this had terrible runtime, giving us $O(N^2)$ to get all of the values.

The Linked List implementation had such poor runtime because each `getEntry()` method call restarts at the beginning of the linked list. What if we could "remember" where we stopped the last time and resume from there the next time? An iterator tailored to a linked list can do this for us, thereby saving a **_lot_** of time. Let's take a look at how this would work on the board.




---
## Iterator Interface and Operations
Many different data structures can be iterated over, so these can't be specific to the List ADT. Additionally, these are separate from any other functionality that a given class might have. Therefore, it is created as an interface. In fact, that's what Java's [Iterator interface](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/util/Iterator.html) looks like:
```Java
public interface Iterator<T>
{
	public boolean hasNext(); // Return true if there are
         // are items remaining in the collection that 
         // have not yet been visited in the iteration
	public T next();
         // Return the next item in the collection
         // Throw an exception if no items remain
	public void remove();
         // Remove the last item returned from the
         // collection. Can only be called one time per
         // item and is optional. 
}
// Since Java 1.8 the Iterator also has the default method forEachRemaining(). See Java documentation for information on this method.
```

So **how** is this interface implemented? And **where**? We want it to be part of a List, but how can that be tdone, since the List is itself an interface? This is a bit convoluted, so we need to consider this carefully.

We could make our iterator methods part of the list interface. We would just add the 3 extra methods to the list, and give our list the extra functionality of an iterator. This would allow the interface methods to access the underlying list directly and be implemented in an effecient way.

However, doing this has drawbacks. Recall that in the example, we needed to have 2 distinct iterators over the same set of data. I.e., We need 2 iterators that each have separate state variables. However, if the iterator methods are part of the list, we have no way of creating & using multiple distinct iterations on the same underlying data. With the iterator implemented internally to the List, if we wanted to move the 'current item', it would be changed globally. There would be no way to have a *2nd* iterator with a different state.

To fix this we need to somehow separate the iterator from the list, while still giving the iterator access to the data within the list.

### Implement the iterator external to but "on top" of the list
We can combine the ideas of an internally-implemented and externally-implemented iterator to produce a useful iterator. We make each iterator a new object, distinct from others, but give it access to implementation of the underlying list so that it can be accessed efficiently. 

So how do we work this into out `ListInterface`? We will have a modified interface called `ListWithIteratorInterface<T>`, which will have all of the `ListInterface` methods and also a single method to generate a new iterator on that list: `public Iterator<T> getIterator()`. This method will return a new Iterator built "on top" of the current list, but with its own state so that multiple iterators can be used on one list.
- Note: `ListWithIteratorInterface<T>` is the author's list interface with the iterator added to it. In Standard Java, the `List<T> `interface already has the iterator method built in.
We write our list classes so that each has code for the `getIterator()` method. This will allow the class to generate an iterator object that allows sequential access to its elements, without violating data abstraction. Thus the iterator object is separate (but related to) the underlying list that it iterates over. 

Let's consider an implementation of the `ListWithIteratorInterface<T>`.
```Java
public class LinkedListWithIterator<T> implements ListWithIteratorInterface<T>
{
    // Same data as our LList
    private Node firstNode;
    private int  numberOfEntries;
    // List methods are the same as for LList
    
    public Iterator<T> getIterator()
    {
	  return iterator();
    } // end getIterator
    
    public Iterator<T> iterator()
    {
          return new IteratorForLinkedList();
    } // end iterator
    ...
```
Notice that the `getIterator()` method is simply returning a new `IteratorForLinkedList` object(Just one line). So, the method is a little anti-climactic. It turns out that almost all of the work is done in the `IteratorForLinkedList` class. This class will be built on the current list and will simply have the ability to go through all of the data in the list in an efficient way. Since it is tailored to the linked list, we can make it a **private inner class** and it can **directly access our linked list instance variables**. Let's look at the details in [Example14.java](handout/Example14.java) an [LinkedListWithIterator.java](handout/LinkedListWithIterator.java).

```Java
private class IteratorForLinkedList implements Iterator<T>
{
    private Node nextNode; 
    private IteratorForLinkedList()
    {
        nextNode = firstNode;  // inner class can access vars in
    }                          // outer class
		
    public boolean hasNext()
    {
	return nextNode != null;
    }

    public void remove()
    {
        throw new UnsupportedOperationException("Not supported ");
    } // end remove


	public T next()
    {
		if (hasNext())
        {
			 Node returnNode = nextNode;   // Save current node
		     nextNode = nextNode.getNextNode(); // Advance iterator
		     return returnNode.getData();  // Return next entry
        }
        else
		 throw new NoSuchElementException("Bad call to next()");
    } // end next

} // end class IteratorForLinkedList
```
- Note that this class is entirely within the `LinkedListWithIterator` class.
- Note that `remove()` is not implemented

Let's now focus on the implementation. Recall that we said the iterator could be tailored to the underlying list. The interface is the same, but the way it is done depends on whether the list is implemented with an array or a linked list. The Linked List implementation uses a Node reference as the sole instance variable for the iterator. It is initialized to `firstNode` when the iterator is created and it progresses down the list with each call to `next()`. Note that with a single Node reference, `remove()` is not possible as we cannot access the previous node.

So what about an array list implementation? We need only an integer to store the index of the current value in the iteration. It is incremented with each call to `next()` and `remove()` can be implemented. However, it must shift to fill in gap(s). 
Note that using an iterator for the array list will not improve our access times to "visit" all of the values in the list. However, it will allow for consistent access so that we can use an iterator to access any list, without having to know if it is an array list or a linked list.

## ListIterator

The Iterator interface can be used for any Java Collection (`List<T>`, `Set<T>`, `SortedSet<T>`, `Queue<T>`, `Deque<T>`). For a List, we can add more functionality to our iterator, such as traversing in both directions rather than one direction only. However, we must consider whether these additional functionalities have any implications on our existing implementations.
- I.e., A Singly Linked List will not support a `ListIterator`.

```Java
public interface ListIterator<T> extends Iterator<T> 
{
	boolean hasNext();
	T next();
	boolean hasPrevious();
	T previous();
	int nextIndex();
	int previousIndex();
	void remove();
	void set(T o);
	void add(T o);
}
```
- Note that this iterator is bidirectional, and it allows objects to be added or removed.

As we discussed previously for Iterator, the best way to implement a `ListIterator` is to implement it "externally", meaning that the methods are not part of the class being iterated upon. We build a `ListIterator` object on top of our list so we can have multiple iterations at once. We also want to make the class that implements the `ListIterator` an inner class so that it has access to the list details. This allows us to tailor our `ListIterator` to the underlying data structure in the most efficient way. However, we need a bit more logic to handle traversals in both directions, as well as both `set()` and `remove()`.

Regarding the logic, it is explained in great detail in the text(Chapter 13). The basic idea is that we need to be able to go in both directions in the list, so we need additional instance methods.

## Final Comments on Iterators and Lists
Another interesting issue is that the structure of iterators allow access to the underlying list. We can also change the underlying list with methods such as `remove()`. However, if we **modify the underlying list via another access** (though the list methods, or a different iterator) within an iteration we will get `ConcurrentModificationException` which will occur next time we call the `next()` method. We are changing the underlying state unbeknownst to the iterator, and could have unexpected results so Java does not allow it(See [Comodification.java](handout/Comodification.java)).

With JDK 1.5, the [Iterable interface](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/lang/Iterable.html) was introduced. It is simply:

```Java
public interface Iterable<T>  
{  
	Iterator<T> iterator();  
}  
```
So any class with an iterator can also implement Iterable.
- See [MyArrayIterable.java](handout/MyArrayIterable.java) and [Example4b.java](handout/Example4b.java). The benefit of this is that these classes can be used with the Java “foreach” loop.
